♪ ...WON'T YOU
COME TO TEA? ♪
♪ COME NEXT SUNDAY
HALF PAST THREE. ♪
YOU LIKE THAT
SONG, DON'T YOU?
DO IT AGAIN.
♪ TEA CAKES, POUND CAKES,
EVERYTHING YOU SEE ♪
♪ WON'T WE HAVE A LOVELY
TIME AT HALF PAST THREE? ♪
YOU LIKE THAT
SONG, DON'T YOU?
ONE OF THE MAJOR
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN HUMANS
AND OTHER ANIMALS IS
OUR GREATER ABILITY
TO MAKE USE OF
SENSORY INFORMATION
THAT WE TAKE IN FROM
OUR ENVIRONMENT.
NEWBORN BABIES DON'T
APPEAR TO BE VERY AWARE
OF THEIR ENVIRONMENT.
THEY SPEND UP TO 20
HOURS A DAY SLEEPING,
AND WHEN THEY'RE
NOT SLEEPING
THEY'RE EATING OR
HAVING ONE OF THEIR
OTHER BODILY
NEEDS ATTENDED TO.
THE COMMUNICATION CONSISTS
ALMOST ENTIRELY OF CRYING
AND GURGLING AND THEY'RE
TOTALLY DEPENDENT ON
ANOTHER PERSON FOR
THEIR SURVIVAL.
HOWEVER, IF WE LOOK MORE
CLOSELY WE FIND THAT
NEONATES, AS NEWBORNS
ARE SOMETIMES CALLED,
HAVE VERY
STRONG REFLEXES.
YOU CAN TEST SOME OF
THESE FOR YOURSELF.
ANYTHING PUT IN THEIR HAND
WILL BE FIRMLY GRASPED,
FOR EXAMPLE.
IT'S SAID THE GRASPING
REFLEX IS SO STRONG
THAT A NEWBORN CAN BE
HUNG FROM A WASHING LINE.
I DON'T THINK WE'LL PUT
THAT TO THE TEST RIGHT NOW.
THE SAME REFLEX CAN BE
SEEN IN THE TOES AND FEET
AT BIRTH.
THE INNATE ROOTING
REFLEX OCCURS IN
THE NEONATE'S CHEEK
IF IT'S TOUCHED.
THIS ALLOWS THE BABY TO
FIND THE NIPPLE OR BOTTLE
AND THERE'S A VERY
STRONG SUCKING REFLEX
PRESENT AT BIRTH.
THESE REFLEXES DON'T LAST
FOREVER, OF COURSE, AND
START TO BECOME VOLUNTARY
DURING CHILDHOOD.
BABIES ARE ALSO BORN
WITH SENSORY REFLEXES.
FOR EXAMPLE, THEY
CAN FIX THEIR GAZE...
AND THEY'LL FOLLOW
A MOVING OBJECT.
OTHER SENSES SUCH AS TASTE
AND HEARING HAVE RECENTLY
BEEN SHOWN TO BE NOT ONLY
PRESENT AT BIRTH BUT ALSO
DEVELOP VERY RAPIDLY IN
THE FIRST FEW WEEKS OF LIFE.
ANN, FOR EXAMPLE, AT THREE
WEEKS WILL BE ABLE TO
DISCRIMINATE HER MOTHER BY
HER VOICE AND BY HER LOOKS.
CAN'T YOU?
YES.
ALL THE PHYSICAL AND
MENTAL EXPERIENCES
YOUNG BABIES HAVE ARE USED
TO DEVELOP MORE COMPLEX
WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING
THE WORLD AROUND THEM.
THIS IS COGNITIVE
DEVELOPMENT.
HOW THIS DEVELOPMENT
OF UNDERSTANDING OCCURS
HAS BEEN AND
CONTINUES TO BE
THE SOURCE OF
MUCH RESEARCH.
JEAN PIAGET WAS BY FAR THE
MOST INFLUENTIAL FIGURE
IN THIS AREA OF PSYCHOLOGY
AND HIS THEORY HAS SHAPED
THE CHILD-REARING AND
EDUCATIONAL PRACTICES
OF THE WESTERN WORLD.
PIAGET WAS BORN IN
SWITZERLAND IN 1896
AND DIED IN 1980.
FOR MANY YEARS HIS WORK
WAS VERY UNFASHIONABLE
IN PSYCHOLOGY.
THE BEHAVIORIST APPROACH
DOMINATED PSYCHOLOGICAL
RESEARCH WELL INTO THE
1950'S AND THIS RULED OUT
MUCH INTEREST IN THE STUDY
OF THINKING, COGNITION,
OR THE MIND.
HE PUBLISHED PROLIFICALLY,
BUT HE WROTE IN FRENCH
WHICH LIMITED
HIS READERSHIP
IN THE EARLY DAYS.
PIAGET LEFT US WITH
AN ENORMOUS AMOUNT OF
LITERATURE AS WELL AS
AN ENORMOUS THEORY.
THE THEORY HAS BEEN TESTED,
ANALYZED, CRITICIZED,
AND MODIFICATIONS
HAVE BEEN SUGGESTED,
BUT IT'S STILL
WIDELY ACCEPTED
AS THE THEORY OF
COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT.
WE WILL TRY TO UNDERSTAND
THE THEORY BEFORE
GOING ON LATER TO A
CRITICAL ANALYSIS.
I SAY "TRY" BECAUSE IT
IS A THEORY WHICH USES
UNFAMILIAR WORDS AND
COMMON SENSE IDEAS
IN RATHER
INDIGESTIBLE FORM.
BASICALLY WHAT PIAGET'S
SAYING IS THAT BABIES HAVE
INNATE, INBORN, ABILITIES
- FAIRLY PRIMITIVE ONES,
BUT ONES WHICH ARE USEFUL
AS A STARTING POINT
TO LEARNING
ABOUT THE WORLD.
THE BABY, THEN,
EXPERIENCES THE WORLD
AND BUILDS ON
HIS ABILITIES
TO LEARN MORE AND MORE
PIECES OF BEHAVIOR.
PIAGET'S STUDIES CONVINCED
HIM THAT CHILDREN ARE NOT
JUST LITTLE ADULTS,
BUT THEY THINK IN A
QUALITIVELY DIFFERENT
WAY TO ADULTS.
IT MAY SEEM OBVIOUS TO US
NOW THAT THIS IS THE CASE,
BUT IT WAS A REVOLUTIONARY
IDEA 50 YEARS AGO.
DURING CHILDHOOD WE
CONSTRUCT AN UNDERSTANDING
OF REALITY BY INTERACTING
WITH THE ENVIRONMENT.
WE'RE NOT BORN
WITH FULL ADULT
POWERS OF THOUGHT,
OBVIOUSLY.
THOUGHT, DEDUCTION,
PROBLEM-SOLVING,
CREATIVITY, ETC. ALL COME
LATER, BUT MUST ACTIVELY
DISCOVER THESE
COGNITIVE SKILLS.
PIAGET'S THEORY ATTEMPTS
TO EXPLAIN HOW WE BUILD ON
INNATE MUSCULAR AND
SENSORY REFLEXES
TO ACHIEVE FULL
ADULT THINKING.
IT ASSUMES THAT WE HAVE AN
INBORN DRIVE TO ORGANIZE
AND MAKE SENSE OF
OUR ENVIRONMENT.
IT ALSO ASSUMES THAT WE
HAVE AN INNATE ABILITY
TO LEARN FROM
PAST EXPERIENCES
AND ADAPT OUR
BEHAVIOR ACCORDINGLY.
THE BASIC UNIT OF
INTELLIGENT BEHAVIOR
PIAGET CALLED A "SCHEMA".
SCHEMAS ARE WAYS IN WHICH
WE TRY TO ORGANIZE AND
UNDERSTAND EXPERIENCES
AND IN THE EARLY DAYS
ARE IN THE SIMPLE FORM
OF INNATE REFLEXES.
GRADUALLY AS THE BABY
DEVELOPS A SCHEMA
THEY BECOME MORE INTERNAL
AND THE BABY STARTS TO
MAKE MENTAL REPRESENTATIONS
OF THE WORLD -
THAT IS, IT
STARTS TO THINK.
SCHEMAS DEVELOP AS A
RESULT OF EXPERIENCE
AND ARE USED AS A NET
BASIS FOR ACTION.
FOR EXAMPLE, A BABY MAY
HAVE DEVELOPED A SCHEMA
FOR SHAKING A RATTLE.
PAST EXPERIENCE OF
PICKING UP RATTLES
HAS SHOWN THAT THEY
MAKE A SOUND WHEN MOVED.
THEREFORE THE
BABY NOW UNDERSTANDS,
OR HAS A SCHEMA, WHICH
GUIDES HIS ACTIONS
WHEN HE NEXT
GRASPS SOMETHING.
NEW SCHEMAS ARE FORMED AND
EXISTING SCHEMAS DEVELOPED
BY THE PROCESSES
OF ASSIMILATION
AND ACCOMMODATION.
ASSIMILATION IS TAKING
IN PIECES OF INFORMATION
FROM THE ENVIRONMENT
AND REACTING TO THEM.
IN THE SAME WAY, FOR
EXAMPLE, ALWAYS SUCKING
SOMETHING PUT IN THEIR
MOUTH WHATEVER IT IS.
HOWEVER, IF WE JUST
CONTINUE TO USE OUR
ALREADY EXISTING SCHEMAS
THERE WOULD BE NO MENTAL
GROWTH AND WE WOULD AS
ADULTS STILL, FOR EXAMPLE,
SUCK EVERYTHING THAT
WAS PUT IN OUR MOUTHS
INDISCRIMINATELY
AND GRASP EVERYTHING
USING A WHOLE HAND
RATHER THAN OUR FINGERS,
OR WE'D SHAKE EVERYTHING
THAT CAME TO US.
THIS IS WHERE
ACCOMMODATION COMES IN.
IN ORDER TO TAKE A COUNT
OF DIFFERENT PROPERTIES
SUCH AS WHETHER IT'S A
BOTTLE WHICH PRODUCES FOOD
OR WHETHER IT'S A BLANKET
WHICH DOESN'T WHEN THE
BABY SUCKS IT, HE MODIFIES
THE SHAPE OF HIS LIPS
TO ACCOMMODATE
DIFFERENT STIMULI.
WHEN SOMETHING HAS
BEEN ACCOMMODATED,
A BALANCE EXISTS
WHICH PIAGET CALLS
"EQUILIBRATION"
OR "EQUILIBRIUM".
THAT IS, UNTIL SOMETHING
NEW IS EXPERIENCED,
AND THEN AN UNCOMFORTABLE
STATE OF IMBALANCE OCCURS.
FOR EXAMPLE, FOOD MAY
START TO BE PRESENTED
IN A DRINKING CUP
OR ON A SPOON.
THE BABY HAS TO
ADAPT ITS BEHAVIOR
IN ORDER TO COPE WITH
THIS NEW STIMULI.
NOW IT'S THE ANXIETY
CAUSED BY THE IMBALANCE
THAT PIAGET SAYS
ENCOURAGES THE CHILD
TO CONTINUE TRYING TO
UNDERSTAND THE WORLD.
TRYING TO UNDERSTAND
PIAGET'S THEORY IS NOT
HELPED BY THE USE OF THIS
VERY UNIQUE VOCABULARY.
ANYWAY, LET'S LOOK
AT A DIAGRAM
SHOWING WHERE
WE'VE GOT SO FAR.
WE HAVE INNATE
STRATEGIES
WHICH MAKE
DEVELOPMENT POSSIBLE.
WE ARE ALSO BORN WITH
SIMPLE REFLEXES WHICH WE
CAN SAY ARE ASSIMILATED
INTO OUR BEHAVIOR PATTERN
IN THE FORM OF "SCHEMA".
AS WE MEET NEW STIMULI
WE ARE THROWN INTO
AN ANXIOUS STATE
OF DISEQUILIBRIUM.
THIS ANXIETY IS REDUCED
THROUGH THE PROCESSES
OF ASSIMILATION AND
ACCOMMODATING OUR BEHAVIOR
TO CREATE NEW SCHEMA.
THIS REDUCES THE TENSION
AND RESTORES A STATE OF
EQUILIBRIUM AND IT'S
THIS STATE OF EQUILIBRIUM
THAT PIAGET SAYS
PROVIDES THE MOTIVATION
TO TRY TO UNDERSTAND
MORE ABOUT OUR WORLD.
IF WE FIT AN EXAMPLE TO
THE DIAGRAM, BABIES HAVE
ASSIMILATED GRASPING
USING THEIR WHOLE HAND,
BUT EVENTUALLY THEY'LL
FIND IT VERY DIFFICULT
TO ASSIMILATE SMALL
OBJECTS AND WILL ADAPT BY
ACCOMMODATING TO THEM IN
DEVELOPING A NEW SCHEMA
FOR PICKING THEM UP WITH
A THUMB AND OPPOSED FINGER
WHICH OF COURSE
IS MUCH EASIER.
WE HAVEN'T FINISHED
EXPLAINING PIAGET'S THEORY
BY ANY MEANS, BUT YOU
PROBABLY NEED A CHANGE NOW
SO HERE'S A LITTLE MENTAL
EXERCISE TO KEEP YOU AWAKE.
WE HAVE BEEN APPLYING
PIAGET'S THEORY
OF COGNITIVE
DEVELOPMENT TO BABIES,
BUT COGNITIVE
GROWTH CONTINUES
THROUGHOUT CHILDHOOD
AND INTO LATER LIFE.
EVEN NOW WE'RE ADAPTING
TO OUR ENVIRONMENT,
ACCOMMODATING OUR
BEHAVIOR, AND DEVELOPING
NEW SCHEMA -
PERHAPS ONE FOR
UNDERSTANDING
PIAGET'S THEORY.
STOP THE VIDEO FOR A FEW
MINUTES AND SEE IF YOU CAN
EXPLAIN HOW YOU MIGHT
DEVELOP, OR HAVE ALREADY
DEVELOPED, A SCHEMA
FOR DRIVING A CAR.
YOU COULD EXPLAIN IT
IN EVERYDAY TERMS FIRST
AND THEN TRY USING
PIAGET'S VOCABULARY.
IF YOU
FOUND THAT EASY,
THE REST OF PIAGET'S
THEORY WILL BE NO PROBLEM.
YOUR ANSWER IN ORDINARY
TERMS MIGHT HAVE BEEN THAT
YOU BUILD ON PAST
EXPERIENCES AND SKILLS
RELATED TO THE TASK OF
DRIVING, FOR EXAMPLE,
STEERING AND CONTROLLING
TOYS, BICYCLES,
SHOPPING TROLLEYS
AND EVERYTHING ELSE.
FROM EVERYDAY TASKS YOU
KNOW WHAT THE WORDS
"PUSH", "PULL",
"TURN" MEAN
AND YOU ENCOUNTER
LEVERS AND DIALS.
IF YOU'RE THEN FACED
WITH THESE IN A CAR,
YOU ADAPT WHAT YOU
ALREADY KNOW TO FIT IN
WITH THE BEHAVIOR
REQUIRED TO DRIVE A CAR.
HAVING LEARNED ONE ASPECT
SUCH AS HOW TO START
THE ENGINE, YOU'RE THEN
MOTIVATED TO LEARN MORE,
AND THUS LEARN EVERYTHING
REQUIRED TO DRIVE A CAR.
YOU CAN ADAPT THIS IDEA
BY THINKING ABOUT HOW
YOU WOULD DEVELOP A SCHEMA
FOR DRIVING A TRACTOR
OR AN AIRPLANE - EXACTLY
THE SAME APPLIES.
YOU MEET A NEW SITUATION
AND ASSIMILATE IT
AND EXPERIENCE A SENSE
OF DISEQUILIBRIUM
BECAUSE YOU HAVEN'T
DEVELOPED A SCHEMA
TO COPE WITH THAT
PARTICULAR THING,
AND THEREFORE YOU
ACCOMMODATE YOUR BEHAVIOR
AND DEVELOP A
SCHEMA FOR IT.
THUS, YOU'RE NOW IN A
STATE OF EQUILIBRIUM AGAIN
AND READY TO DEAL WITH MORE
AND MORE NEW EXPERIENCES.
WE CAN SEE THAT THE
LIMITED NUMBER OF SCHEMA
IN THE YOUNG BABY GROW
RAPIDLY AS MORE AND MORE
ARE ASSIMILATED AND THEY
BECOME MORE COMPLEX
AS ACCOMMODATION
TAKES PLACE
AND THEY FORM THE
BASIS OF THINKING.
BECAUSE ASSIMILATION,
ACCOMMODATION,
AND EQUILIBRIUM OPERATE
CONSISTENTLY THROUGHOUT
CHILDHOOD AND
IN LATER LIFE,
THEY'RE KNOWN AS THE
"INVARIANT FUNCTIONS".
IT IS THESE THAT PRODUCE
THE MOTIVATION TO DEVELOP.
PIAGET IDENTIFIED
FOUR DISTINCT STAGES
OF COGNITIVE
DEVELOPMENT.
THE SENSORI-MOTOR STAGE
WHICH OCCURS BETWEEN
BIRTH AND TWO YEARS.
THE PRE-OPERATIONAL STAGE
BETWEEN TWO AND SEVEN YEARS,
THE CONCRETE OPERATIONAL
STAGE BETWEEN
SEVEN AND TWELVE YEARS,
AND THE FORMAL OPERATIONAL
STAGE FROM ELEVEN TO
TWELVE YEARS ONWARDS.
PIAGET CLAIMED THAT ALL
CHILDREN PASSED THROUGH
THESE STAGES IN
THE SAME ORDER
BUT AT DIFFERENT SPEEDS.
HIS CONCLUSIONS WERE
MAINLY THE RESULT OF
TESTING AND OBSERVING
HIS OWN THREE CHILDREN
WHO HAD THE SURPRISINGLY
NORMAL NAMES OF
JACQUELINE, LUCIENNE,
AND LAURENT.
LET US LOOK AT EACH
STAGE MORE CLOSELY.
THE SENSORI-MOTOR STAGE
WHICH LASTS UNTIL THE
BABY IS ROUGHLY TWO YEARS
OLD IS THE ACTION STAGE.
THE BABY THINKS THROUGH
ACTING ON OBJECTS,
THAT IS, GRASPING,
SUCKING, TOUCHING,
SHAKING, ETC., AND
THROUGH THE SENSES.
THROUGH APPLYING ACTION
SCHEMA THE BABY BUILDS UP
A MENTAL PICTURE OR FINDS
OUT ABOUT THE OBJECTS AND
THE PEOPLE AROUND THEM.
WHAT OBJECTS CAN BE
GRASPED, WHAT CAN BE
SUCKED, WHAT NOISE
WILL THEY MAKE,
WHAT THEY FEEL
LIKE TO THE TOUCH.
IN THIS STAGE THE CHILD
IS PROFOUNDLY EGOCENTRIC.
THAT IS, IT IS UNABLE TO
MAKE DISTINCTIONS BETWEEN
WHAT IS ITSELF AND WHAT
IS THE REST OF THE WORLD.
NOTHING THEREFORE HAS AN
INDEPENDENT EXISTENCE
UNTIL THE BABY FINDS
OUT WHAT IS ITSELF
AND WHAT IS NOT.
WHEN BABIES REALIZE
THE DISTINCTION,
THEY LEARN THAT OBJECTS
CONTINUE TO EXIST
EVEN WHEN THEY'RE
OUT OF SIGHT.
UNTIL THE BABY
HAS THIS NOTION
KNOWN AS "OBJECT
PERMANENCE",
OUT OF SIGHT MEANS
OUT OF EXISTENCE.
IT IS THUS AN
IMPORTANT MILESTONE
IN COGNITIVE
DEVELOPMENT.
PIAGET SUGGESTS
THAT ALTHOUGH A
THREE-MONTH-OLD BABY
MAY LOOK WITH INTEREST
AT AN OBJECT WHEN IT'S
WAVED WITHIN RANGE,
PERHAPS EVEN REACH OUT
FOR IT OR FOLLOW IT
WITH ITS EYES, ONCE
IT IS OUT OF SIGHT
IT APPEARS TO
BE FORGOTTEN.
IT IS NECESSARY
AT THIS STAGE
THAT THE WHOLE
OBJECT IS VISIBLE
FOR THE BABY TO
RESPOND TO IT AT ALL.
IT IS NOT UNTIL ABOUT
EIGHT MONTHS THAT THE BABY
WILL REACH FOR A
COMPLETELY HIDDEN OBJECT.
USUALLY AT ABOUT TEN
MONTHS THE BABY WILL
SEARCH FOR AN OBJECT
WHICH HAS BEEN HIDDEN,
BUT IF HE SEES IT MOVED
TO ANOTHER HIDING PLACE
HE'LL CONTINUE TO LOOK
IN THE ORIGINAL PLACE.
IT'S ONLY BY ABOUT 12
MONTHS THAT THE CHILD HAS
COMPLETE UNDERSTANDING OF
THE EXISTENCE OF OBJECTS
WHICH ARE OUT OF SIGHT.
WE CAN RELATE THIS TO
THE STUDY OF ATTACHMENT.
IT IS INTERESTING TO NOTE
THAT SEPARATION ANXIETY
- WHERE THE BABY GETS
EXTREMELY DISTRESSED WHEN
THEIR ATTACHMENT FIGURE
LEAVES THEIR SIGHT -
OCCURS AT AROUND SIX TO
SEVEN MONTHS WHEN THE BABY
HAS FORMED ATTACHMENTS
BUT NOT YET ACQUIRED
THE IDEA OF PERMANENCE
OF OBJECTS OR PEOPLE.
CHILDREN DEVELOP THE
ABILITY TO USE SYMBOLS
TO REPRESENT THINGS TOWARDS
THE END OF THIS STAGE.
FOR EXAMPLE, THEY
UNDERSTAND THAT A DOLL
REPRESENTS OR STANDS
FOR A BABY OR A PERSON.
THIS IS KNOWN AS THE
"GENERAL SYMBOLIC FUNCTION".
IT IS FASCINATING TO
WATCH A CHILD MOVE FROM
DEALING WITH A DOLL AS
JUST ANOTHER OBJECT TO BE
CHEWED, SHAKEN, OR THROWN,
AND INSTEAD DEAL WITH IT
AS A SYMBOLIC OBJECT WHICH
REPRESENTS SOMETHING
- FOR EXAMPLE, TALKING
TO OR FEEDING A DOG.
THE CHILD MAKES
HUGE STRIDES
IN DEVELOPING ITS ABILITY
TO USE SPOKEN LANGUAGE
DURING THIS STAGE.
UNLIKE SYMBOLS, SIGNS LIKE
LANGUAGE DON'T LOOK LIKE
THE THINGS
THEY REPRESENT
SO ARE INEVITABLY
HARDER TO LEARN.
PIAGET, HOWEVER, SEES
LANGUAGE AS A RESULT
OF THOUGHT, NOT
AS A SOURCE OF IT,
SO IT IS NOT A KEY
FEATURE IN THIS THEORY.
TO SUMMARIZE THE
KEY FEATURES OF THE
SENSORI-MOTOR CHILD:
THOUGHT PROCESSES DEVELOP
USING SENSES AND ACTIONS.
UNDERSTANDING OF OBJECT
PERMANENCE DEVELOPS.
THE IDEA THAT SYMBOLS
CAN BE USED TO REPRESENT
OBJECTS DEVELOPS TOWARDS
THE END OF THIS STAGE.
THIS SYMBOLIC THINKING,
AS WELL AS LANGUAGE,
CONTINUE TO
DEVELOP IMPRESSIVELY
IN THE NEXT STAGE
- THE PRE-OPERATIONAL.
IN THIS STAGE THE CHILD'S
THINKING IS DOMINATED
BY WHAT IT SEES RATHER
THAN BY LOGICAL PRINCIPLES.
THE KEY FEATURE
IS EGOCENTRISM.
PIAGET CONSIDERS
PRE-OPERATIONAL CHILDREN
TO BE IRREDEEMABLY
EGOCENTRIC IN THAT
ALTHOUGH THEY ARE NOW
WELL AWARE OF SELF
AS SEPARATE FROM THE
REST OF THE WORLD,
THEY'RE QUITE UNABLE
TO TAKE ANYONE ELSE'S
POINT OF VIEW INTO
CONSIDERATION.
PIAGET CLAIMS THAT THE
CHILD CANNOT SEE THE
POINT OF VIEW OF ANOTHER
IN THE LITERAL SENSE
IN THAT THE CHILD
WOULD NOT UNDERSTAND
THAT AN OBJECT WILL BE
SEEN DIFFERENTLY FROM
ANOTHER ANGLE OF VIEW,
AND IN THE SENSE OF BEING
UNABLE TO UNDERSTAND
THAT ANOTHER PERSON
MIGHT FEEL OR THINK
DIFFERENTLY TO ITSELF.
A WELL-KNOWN DEMONSTRATION
OF EGOCENTRISM
BY PIAGET AND INHELDER
REPORTED IN 1956 MADE USE
OF THE TABLETOP MODEL
OF A SWISS MOUNTAIN SCENE.
AFTER AN OPPORTUNITY TO
BECOME FAMILIAR WITH THE
MODEL, CHILDREN ARE ASKED
TO CHOOSE A PHOTOGRAPH
FROM A SELECTION WHICH
SHOWED THE VIEW OF THE
SCENE FROM THE POINT OF
VIEW OF A DOLL WHICH WAS
PLACED AT A DIFFERENT
ANGLE FROM THE CHILD.
TO GET THE TASK RIGHT,
THE CHILD WOULD
HAVE TO TAKE THE DOLL'S
PERSPECTIVE INTO ACCOUNT.
EACH MOUNTAIN WAS PAINTED
IN DIFFERENT COLOR
AND TOPPED WITH EITHER
A HOUSE, A RED CROSS,
OR SNOW FOR CLARITY.
ONLY CHILDREN OF EIGHT
YEARS OR OVER WERE ABLE TO
CONSISTENTLY SUCCEED
AT THIS TASK.
SIX-YEAR-OLDS
ACHIEVED SOME SUCCESS,
AND 4-YEAR-OLDS TYPICALLY
CHOSE THEIR OWN VIEW.
THIS WOULD BE A SIMPLE
PRACTICAL TO RUN YOURSELF
IF YOU HAVE ACCESS TO
CHILDREN OF THE RIGHT AGE
AND CAN
BUILD MOUNTAINS.
ALTERNATIVELY, YOU COULD
USE THE MODERN-DAY VERSION
WHICH WE'LL
DEMONSTRATE LATER.
AT THE BEGINNING OF THE
PRE-OPERATIONAL STAGE,
THE CHILD ALSO
HAS DIFFICULTY
IN DEALING WITH
TASKS LOGICALLY.
FOR EXAMPLE, CLASSIFYING
THINGS, PUTTING THINGS
INTO A LOGICAL SEQUENCE OR
SERIES, AND UNDERSTANDING
RELATIONS BETWEEN
CATEGORIES, FOR EXAMPLE,
APPLES, AND
SUB-CATEGORIES,
FOR EXAMPLE, RED APPLES
AND GREEN APPLES.
A FOUR-YEAR-OLD MAY
BE ABLE TO SEPARATE
COLORED PENCILS INTO YELLOW
ONES AND GREEN ONES,
OR INTO BIG ONES
AND LITTLE ONES,
BUT IT'S LIKELY TO FIND
IT MORE DIFFICULT TO TAKE
TWO DIMENSIONS INTO
ACCOUNT SO AS TO PICK OUT
ALL THE BIG YELLOW ONES OR
ALL THE SMALL GREEN ONES.
LIE THEM DOWN
IF YOU WANT TO.
ARE THERE ANY MORE
BIG GREEN PENCILS?
YOU'VE FOUND
ANOTHER ONE.
THAT'S A GOOD BOY, YOU
DID THAT VERY WELL.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
SIMILARLY, A CHILD AT
THE BEGINNING OF THE
PRE-OPERATIONAL STAGE,
SAY THREE OR FOUR,
WILL HAVE DIFFICULTY
ARRANGING ITEMS IN ORDER
SUCH AS LONGEST TO SHORTEST
OR TALLEST TO SMALLEST.
A CHILD UP TO FIVE,
IF SHOWN A GARAGE WITH
YELLOW CARS AND BLUE CARS
IS LIKELY TO AGREE WITH YOU
THAT THE YELLOW ONES ARE
CARS AND THE BLUE ONES
ARE CARS, HOWEVER, IF
THEN ASKED "IF ALL THE
YELLOW CARS DRIVE AWAY,
WILL THERE BE ANY LEFT?"
THE CHILD IS QUITE
LIKELY TO SAY
THAT THERE WON'T
BE ANY LEFT.
PIAGET BELIEVES THAT AN
INCORRECT ANSWER REFLECTS
NOT MERELY CONFUSION
OVER VERBAL LABELS
BUT A DEEPER
INABILITY TO CONSIDER
MORE THAN ONE
FEATURE AT A TIME.
THIS CONCENTRATION PIAGET
CALLED "CENTRATION".
UNTIL A CHILD
CAN DE-CENTER,
HE WILL BE UNABLE TO
CLASSIFY IN ANY LOGICAL WAY
AND WILL STILL BE
UNABLE TO, SAY,
TELL THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN CATS AND DOGS.
WHY?
BECAUSE HE ONLY TAKES INTO
ACCOUNT ONE ATTRIBUTE;
THAT IS, PERHAPS THAT
THEY HAVE FOUR LEGS,
AND IGNORES THE
OTHER DIFFERENCES.
HAVING ACQUIRED
THIS COGNITIVE SKILL
BY FOUR TO
FIVE YEARS OLD,
THE OLDER PRE-OPERATIONAL
THINKER STILL APPEARS
TO HAVE PROBLEMS
WITH CLASSIFICATION.
YOU CAN TRY THIS
EXAMPLE YOURSELF.
ARE THEY ALL CARS?
ARE THERE MORE BLUE
CARS OR MORE RED CARS?
CARS OR MORE CARS?
BLUE CARS.
YOU MAY HAVE HAD TO THINK
A SECOND OR TWO BEFORE
ANSWERING THAT QUESTION,
BUT ACCORDING TO PIAGET,
SIX AND SEVEN-YEAR-OLDS
FIND IT VERY HARD.
HE SAYS THE CHILD IS
FAILING TO UNDERSTAND THE
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE
WHOLE CLASS - THAT'S CARS,
AND THE SUB-CLASSES - THE
DIFFERENTLY COLORED CARS.
THE CHILD IS STILL
INFLUENCED BY WHAT IT SEES.
IT'S EASIER TO
PERCEIVE BLUE CARS
THAN PERCEIVE
ALL CARS.
HOWEVER, YOU MAY WANT TO
ARGUE, AS MANY OTHERS HAVE,
THAT THE QUESTION IN
THESE WHAT WE CALL
"CLASS INCLUSION TASKS" IS
TOO DIFFICULT TO UNDERSTAND.
WE'LL COME BACK
TO THIS LATER.
ANOTHER FEATURE OF THIS
PRE-OPERATIONAL STAGE
IS WHEN CHILDREN REFER
TO INANIMATE OBJECTS
AS IF THEY'RE REALLY
ANIMATE OR ALIVE.
PIAGET CALLS THIS "ANIMISM",
THUS ALL KINDS OF OBJECTS
HAVE EMOTIONS, MOTIVES,
INTENTIONS, THOUGHTS,
DESIRES ATTRIBUTED
TO THEM WHOLESALE.
I EXPECT MOST OF US
AS CHILDREN USED OUR
TEDDY BEAR AS A SCAPEGOAT
FOR OUR BAD BEHAVIOR.
THIS CAN BE SEEN AS A
PRODUCT OF EGOCENTRISM,
AS THE CHILD
IMAGINES EVERYTHING,
AND ESPECIALLY EVERYONE,
TO BE LIKE ITSELF.
IT DOESN'T FEEL
LIKE IT, IT IS SICK.
YOU HAVE TO GIVE
IT SOME MEDICINE.
CONSERVATION IS PROBABLY THE
MOST WIDELY INVESTIGATED
AREA OF THE PRE-OPERATIONAL
CHILD'S THINKING.
BY "CONSERVATION" PIAGET
MEANS THE ABILITY TO
UNDERSTAND THAT SOMETHING
REMAINS THE SAME
EVEN THOUGH IT HAS BEEN
TRANSFORMED IN APPEARANCE.
A CLASSIC EXAMPLE IS
THAT OF A GLASS OF WATER
REMAINING THE SAME
QUANTITY WHEN POURED FROM
A SHORT FAT GLASS INTO
A TALL THIN GLASS.
A PRE-OPERATIONAL CHILD
IS LIKELY TO FOCUS ON THE
HEIGHT OF THE WATER IN THE
TALL THIN GLASS AND IS
LIKELY TO JUDGE THAT THERE
IS NOW MORE WATER BECAUSE
THE LEVEL IS HIGHER THAN
IN THE SHORTER GLASS.
NOW THEN, HAVE THEY STILL
GOT THE SAME AMOUNT
OR HAS ONE GOT MORE
THAN THE OTHER?
THAT ONE'S GOT
MORE THAN THAT ONE.
SO IF I HAD THAT ONE
AND YOU HAD THAT ONE,
IT WOULDN'T BE FAIR
'CUZ I'D HAVE MORE.
RIGHT. VERY
GOOD. OKAY.
THIS FALSE
JUDGMENT IS LIKELY
IN SPITE OF THE CHILD
ACTUALLY SEEING
THE TRANSFORMATION
TAKING PLACE.
THAT IS, SEEING THE
WATER BEING POURED,
OR EVEN IF YOU ALLOW THEM
TO POUR IT THEMSELVES.
IT OCCURS BECAUSE
OF THE CHILD'S
LACK OF REVERSIBILITY.
THAT IS, THEY'RE UNABLE
TO HOLD ALL THE FEATURES
OF THE SITUATION
IN THEIR HEADS
AND THEY CAN'T THINK
ABOUT THEM BEING REVERSED.
BUT LOGIC DOES TRIUMPH
OVER APPEARANCE EVENTUALLY.
BUT THEY'VE STILL
GOT THE SAME NOW?
YES.
WHY HAVE THEY
STILL GOT THE SAME?
BECAUSE YOU POURED...
BECAUSE YOU SWAPPED
GLASSES AND YOU POURED ALL
THAT IN, BUT THEY'RE NOT
THE SAME BECAUSE THAT ONE
IS WIDER THAN THAT ONE, SO
THAT ONE GOES TO THERE.
VERY GOOD.
WELL DONE, THANK
YOU VERY MUCH.
TO SUMMARIZE THE
KEY FEATURES OF THE
PRE-OPERATIONAL STAGE:
THE CHILD TENDS TO BE
EGOCENTRIC, THAT IS,
THEY SEE THE WORLD FROM
THEIR OWN VIEWPOINT.
THEY ALSO HAVE PROBLEMS
WITH CLASSIFICATION
AND TEND TO CENTER
ON ONE FEATURE
AT THE EXPENSE
OF OTHERS.
THEY TEND TO ATTRIBUTE
HUMAN FEELINGS
TO INANIMATE OBJECTS.
AND, ACCORDING
TO PIAGET,
THEY'RE AS YET
UNABLE TO CONSERVE.
THE THIRD STAGE IDENTIFIED
BY PIAGET IS THE
CONCRETE OPERATIONAL,
WHICH OCCURS FROM
THE AGES OF SEVEN TO
ELEVEN APPROXIMATELY.
EGOCENTRISM DECLINES
RAPIDLY DURING THIS STAGE,
PROBABLY DUE TO MATURATION
IN SOME PART, BUT ALSO
DUE TO PLAYING AND
COOPERATING WITH OTHERS.
THEY CAN UNDERSTAND
CLASSIFICATIONS OF CLASSES
AND SUB-CLASSES AND CAN
INCREASINGLY CARRY OUT
REVERSALS AS SHOWN
BY THEIR ABILITY
NOT ONLY TO DO ADDITION
BUT ALSO TO SUBTRACT.
THE CHILD IS NOW
INCREASINGLY ABLE TO TAKE
MORE THAN ONE ATTRIBUTE
INTO ACCOUNT SO THEY CAN
EASILY, FOR EXAMPLE,
DIFFERENTIATE ANIMALS.
OPERATIONAL THINKING
IS CONSOLIDATED,
AND CONSERVATION AND MOST
CONSERVATION OPERATIONS
ARE UNDERSTOOD BY THE
END OF THIS STAGE.
OTHER TYPES OF
CONSERVATION SUCH AS
VOLUME WHICH REQUIRE AN
UNDERSTANDING OF SHAPE,
SIZE, AND MASS, MAY NOT BE
CONSERVED UNTIL ELEVEN
OR TWELVE - ACCORDING
TO PIAGET THAT IS.
THIS STEP BY STEP
ACQUISITION OF NEW
OPERATIONS WAS CALLED
"DECALAGE" BY PIAGET.
HOWEVER, THE CHILD CAN
STILL ONLY PERFORM
THE OPERATIONS IF
THE CONCRETE OBJECTS
ARE PHYSICALLY PRESENT.
FOR EXAMPLE, IF GIVEN AN
ABSTRACT PROBLEM SUCH AS
"JOE IS TALLER
THAN LUCY;
LUCY IS SHORTER
THAN MARIA;
WHO IS THE
SHORTEST?"
THE CHILD AT THIS STAGE
WILL HAVE DIFFICULTY.
PAUL IS BIGGER
THAN GEORGE,
BUT HENRY IS
SMALLER THAN GEORGE.
PAUL IS BIGGER
THAN GEORGE,
BUT HENRY IS SMALLER
THAN GEORGE.
WHO'S THE BIGGEST?
I'D SAY HENRY.
IF, THOUGH, THE THREE
PEOPLE WERE PHYSICALLY
PRESENT THEY WOULD
FIND IT VERY EASY
TO ORDER THE HEIGHT.
THIS TYPE OF TASK IS
CALLED "TRANSITIVITY"
AND MANY ADULTS INCLUDING
MYSELF FIND THIS KIND
OF MENTAL GYMNASTICS
VERY DIFFICULT.
TRY THIS ONE.
SUSAN LIKES BANANAS
MORE THAN KEN;
KEN LIKES BANANAS
LESS THAN MARK;
WHO LIKES BANANAS
THE LEAST?
THIS REQUIRES SEVERAL
SKILLS SUCH AS
UNDERSTANDING OF
COMPARATIVE WORDS SUCH AS
"MORE", "BIGGER", "LESS",
"LONGER" WHICH WE KNOW
APPEAR RELATIVELY LATE IN
THE CHILD'S DEVELOPMENT
OF SPOKEN LANGUAGE.
IT ALSO REQUIRES
GOOD VISUAL MEMORY.
CHILDRENS' MEMORIES HAVE
BEEN SHOWN BY FLAVELL
TO DEVELOP RAPIDLY
DURING THIS PERIOD,
WITH REHEARSAL AND MNEMONICS
INCREASINGLY BEING USED.
BELOW SIX YEARS OLD,
CHILDREN DON'T REHEARSE
OR USE MNEMONICS, BUT
BY SIX OR SEVEN YEARS
THEY REHEARSE
SPONTANEOUSLY,
OFTEN ALOUD AND
MOVING THEIR LIPS.
BY NINE, REHEARSAL IS
SPONTANEOUS AND SILENT.
TO SUMMARIZE THE
CONCRETE THINKER:
CONSERVATION IS ATTAINED
DURING THIS STAGE.
CLASSIFICATION
IS NO PROBLEM,
BUT TRANSITIVITY TASKS
STILL CAUSE DIFFICULTY
UNLESS THE CONCRETE OBJECTS
ARE PHYSICALLY PRESENT.
THE FOURTH AND FINAL STAGE
IDENTIFIED BY PIAGET
IS THE FORMAL
OPERATIONAL STAGE
WHICH STARTS AT ELEVEN
AND, PIAGET THOUGHT,
WOULD BE COMPLETE
BY 15 OR 16 YEARS.
HE CLAIMED THAT THIS
IS THE HIGHEST LEVEL
OF THINKING AND THAT AFTER
DEVELOPMENTS IN THIS STAGE
HAVE TAKEN PLACE THERE'S
VERY LITTLE CHANGE
TO COGNITIVE
ABILITIES AFTER THAT.
THE KEY FEATURE
IS THE DEVELOPMENT
OF ABSTRACT THOUGHT.
IT WAS INTERESTING TO
NOTE FLAVELL'S FINDING
THAT COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT
SEEMS TO TAKE PLACE
IN LINE WITH DEVELOPMENT
OF MEMORY SKILLS
AND THEY MUST PLAY A PART,
OR A MAJOR PART INDEED,
IN THE DEVELOPMENT
OF ABSTRACT THOUGHT
WHICH RELIES ON STORAGE
AND MANIPULATION
OF VAST QUANTITIES
OF INFORMATION.
ADOLESCENTS CAN NOW
CONSIDER SUCH CONCEPTS AS
JUSTICE, MORALITY, AND
DEATH AND BECOME CONCERNED
ABOUT THE FUTURE AND
IDEOLOGICAL PROBLEMS.
HYPOTHESES ABOUT THINGS
NOT ACTUALLY EXPERIENCED
CAN NOW BEGIN
TO BE GENERATED
AND TESTED
SYSTEMATICALLY.
DEDUCTIVE REASONING ALLOWS
MASTERY OF SUCH COMPLEX
SYSTEMS AS SCIENCE,
RELIGION, AND MATHEMATICS.
ALRIGHT, BEFORE WE GO ANY
FURTHER YOU MIGHT LIKE TO
STOP THE VIDEO
AND PLAY A GAME.
WELL, WHY NOT?
ONE PERSON THINKS OF
AN OBJECT IN THE ROOM
- YOU MIGHT HAVE
PLAYED THIS BEFORE -
THE OTHERS HAVE TO
GUESS WHAT IT IS.
THEY HAVE 20 QUESTIONS
AND YOU CAN ONLY ANSWER
YES OR NO.
HAVE A GO NOW.
NOW, THINK OF THE TYPE OF
QUESTIONS THAT WERE ASKED.
A CONCRETE OPERATION
THINKER WOULD TEND TO
STAB AT THINGS SUCH AS,
IS IT THAT BOOK?
IS IT THIS PENCIL?
IS IT THAT TABLE?
IT WOULD BE HOPED
THAT YOUR QUESTIONS
WERE MORE ADVANCED
AND TRIED TO
ELIMINATE LARGE
NUMBERS OF OBJECTS.
FOR EXAMPLE, IS IT
THIS SIDE OF THE ROOM?
IS IT MADE OF WOOD?
ALTHOUGH AS THE
POSSIBILITIES ARE
NARROWED DOWN, YOUR
LATER QUESTIONS
WILL OBVIOUSLY
BE MORE SPECIFIC.
THIS COULD FORM THE
BASIS OF A PRACTICAL
DEMONSTRATION OF THE
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
CONCRETE AND FORMAL
OPERATIONAL THOUGHT.
YOU COULD PLAY THE GAME,
SAY, WITH SEVEN TO TEN
YEAR OLDS AND
COMPARE THEIR METHODS
WITH SUBJECTS
YOUR OWN AGE.
YOU COULD DEVISE SOME
SIMPLE SCORING SYSTEM
FOR DIFFERENT
CATEGORIES OF QUESTIONS.
PIAGET AND HIS COLLEAGUE,
INHELDER, DEVISED THE
WELL-KNOWN PENDULUM
TASK WHICH REQUIRES
ABSTRACT THOUGHT,
DEDUCTIVE REASONING,
AND HYPOTHESIS TESTING.
GIVEN THREE PIECES OF
STRING OF DIFFERENT LENGTH,
A SET OF THREE WEIGHTS,
AND THREE DEGREES
OF PUSH ON THE WEIGHT
- SOFT, MEDIUM, OR HARD -
WHICH FACTOR AFFECTS THE
SPEED OF THE PENDULUM SWING?
IS IT THE LENGTH
OF THE STRING?
IS IT THE
WEIGHT ATTACHED?
OR IS IT THE
FORCE OF THE PUSH?
THE ANSWER, IN FACT,
TO PUT YOU OUT OF
YOUR MISERY, IS THE
LENGTH OF STRING
WHICH ALONE DETERMINES
THE SPEED OF THE PENDULUM.
BUT THE IMPORTANT FACT
IS THE METHOD USED
TO PRODUCE THE ANSWER.
AGAIN, YOU'D EXPECT
CONCRETE OPERATIONAL
THINKERS TO USE FAIRLY
TRIAL AND ERROR METHODS,
PERHAPS RANDOM
COMBINATIONS RATHER THAN
SOME SYSTEMATIC
ELIMINATION.
TO SUMMARIZE THE KEY
FEATURES OF PIAGET'S
FINAL STAGE, THE
FORMAL OPERATIONAL:
THE CHILD CAN NOW USE
FULL ADULT REASONING
AND IS CAPABLE OF ALL
FORMS OF ABSTRACT THOUGHT.
SO NOW THAT WE HAVE
BRIEFLY COVERED THE BASICS
OF PIAGET'S THEORY, LET'S
JUST SUMMARIZE QUICKLY:
WE DEVELOP UNITS OF
INTELLIGENT BEHAVIOR,
SCHEMATA - THAT'S THE
PLURAL FOR SCHEMA -
BY ASSIMILATING
NEW EXPERIENCES
FROM THE ENVIRONMENT.
A FEELING OF
DISEQUILIBRIUM OCCURS
CAUSING US TO ACCOMMODATE
OUR BEHAVIOR BY DEVELOPING
SCHEMA TO RETURN TO A
STATE OF EQUILIBRIUM.
THIS EQUILIBRIUM
MOTIVATES US
TO SEEK OUT
NEW EXPERIENCES
WHICH STARTS THE
PROCESS ALL OVER AGAIN.
WE MOVE THROUGH FOUR
STAGES DURING THIS
COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT UNTIL
WE ATTAIN ADULT THOUGHT.
THIS IS PIAGET'S VIEW, BUT
MOST PARTS OF HIS RESEARCH
HAVE BEEN EXAMINED,
CRITICIZED,
AND CHEWED OVER AND
THIS HAS LED TO
A REFORMULATION
OF HIS THEORY.
PIAGET'S METHODS HAVE
ALWAYS BEEN CRITICIZED
BY THE PSYCHOLOGISTS WHO
FAVOR MORE STRINGENT
SCIENTIFIC METHODS.
MOST OF HIS THEORY IS
BASED ON THE RESULTS OF
THE METHOD KNOWN AS
"CLINICAL INTERVIEW"
WHEREBY THE ANSWER TO A
QUESTION FORMS THE BASIS
OF THE NEXT
QUESTION ASKED
AND THIS MAKES THE
WHOLE PROCEDURE
RATHER SUBJECTIVE
AND UNQUANTIFIABLE.
SUBJECTIVE BECAUSE
EACH PARTICIPANT HAS A
DIFFERENT SET OF QUESTIONS
AND UNQUANTIFIABLE BECAUSE
THE TYPE OF DATA
RECEIVED CAN'T READILY
BE ANALYZED
STATISTICALLY.
HE IS ALSO CRITICIZED
FOR LEADING CHILDREN
IN THE USE OF QUESTIONS
AND OF SELECTIVELY
TAKING THEIR VERBAL
RESPONSES AS EXAMPLES
TO ILLUSTRATE A THEORY
THAT HE'S ALREADY CREATED.
THE ARGUMENT IS THAT
THE PROCESS BY WHICH
HIS THEORY WAS ARRIVED
AT IS NOT REPLICABLE
WHICH MAKES
IT UNTESTABLE.
A COUNTER-ARGUMENT
YOU COULD PUT FORWARD
IS THAT IF PIAGET HAD
USED MORE RIGOROUS
SCIENTIFIC METHODS
HE MIGHT NEVER HAVE
PRODUCED SUCH A
COMPREHENSIVE THEORY.
MANY OF THE LESS FORMAL
METHODS WHICH YOU MAY HAVE
USED YOURSELVES,
SUCH AS THE CASE STUDY,
PRODUCE VERY RICH DETAILED
INFORMATION ABOUT A SMALL
NUMBER OF CHILDREN
RATHER THAN VERY LITTLE
INFORMATION ABOUT A VERY
LARGE NUMBER OF CHILDREN
WHICH WE FIND IN
SCIENTIFIC INVESTIGATIONS.
RECENTLY QUALITATIVE
METHODS SUCH AS THE CASE
STUDY AND OBSERVATIONAL
STUDIES, RATHER THAN
QUANTITATIVE METHODS SUCH
AS EXPERIMENTS USING
SOPHISTICATED STATISTICAL
ANALYSIS, HAVE ATTRACTED
ATTENTION AS GRADUALLY
THE LIMITATIONS OF THE
SCIENTIFIC APPROACH
HAVE BECOME APPARENT.
RECENT RESEARCH SUGGESTS
THAT PIAGET UNDERESTIMATED
THE ABILITIES OF THE CHILD
IN THE FIRST TWO STAGES
AND OVERESTIMATED
THE ABILITIES
OF THE FORMAL
OPERATIONAL CHILD.
OTHERS HAVE SAID THAT
HIS THEORY NEGLECTS THE
IMPORTANCE OF LANGUAGE AND
OF SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS
WHICH ARE SO
CENTRAL IN CHILDHOOD
MUST PLAY A PART IN
OUR MENTAL DEVELOPMENT.
(BABY BABBLING)
TO PIAGET'S CREDIT,
HE HAS BEEN FLEXIBLE
IN HIS WILLINGNESS
TO MAKE MODIFICATIONS
IN THE LIGHT OF OTHER
PEOPLES' RESEARCH.
THERE ARE HUGE NUMBERS
OF RESEARCH FINDINGS
WHICH DISAGREE
WITH PIAGET'S.
WE'LL JUST LOOK
AT A FEW OF THESE
MORE SIGNIFICANT ONES
AND THE MORE RECENT ONES,
STARTING WITH THE
SENSORI-MOTOR STAGE.
EXPERIMENTS BY BAUER
SUGGEST THAT BABIES MAY
ACQUIRE OBJECT PERMANENCE
AS EARLY AS ONE MONTH OLD
- MUCH EARLIER THAN
PIAGET SUGGESTED.
FOR EXAMPLE, IN ONE
EXPERIMENT WITH ONE
TO FOUR MONTH OLDS, HE
MADE AN OBJECT DISAPPEAR
BY BRINGING A SCREEN
DOWN IN FRONT OF IT.
WHEN THE SCREEN LIFTED
THE OBJECT WAS NOT THERE
AND BAUER LOOKED FOR
EVIDENCE OF SURPRISE
IN THE BABY SUCH
AS A RAISED PULSE.
IF THE BABY SHOWED
SURPRISE WHEN THE OBJECT
IS MISSING RATHER THAN
WHEN IT'S PRESENT,
THEN THIS SUGGESTS
AN UNDERSTANDING
OF OBJECT PERMANENCE.
BAUER ALSO SHOWED THREE
TO FOUR MONTH OLDS
AN INTERESTING OBJECT
WHICH THEY MIGHT HAVE
REACHED OUT FOR.
WHEN THEY START TO REACH
FOR IT THE LIGHTS WERE
SWITCHED OFF AND INFRARED
LIGHTS ENABLED BAUER
TO SEE THAT THE BABIES
STILL CONTINUED
TO TRY AND REACH
THE OBJECT.
THIS SUGGESTS THAT
ALTHOUGH THEY COULDN'T
SEE THE OBJECT
THEY STILL BELIEVED
IT CONTINUED TO EXIST.
PIAGET DIDN'T HAVE
SOPHISTICATED TECHNOLOGY
TO HELP HIM AT THAT TIME
AND BAUER SUGGESTS THAT
IN THE TYPICAL
PIAGET TEST
THE BABY IS JUST SHOWING
IMMATURE MOTOR ABILITIES.
FOR EXAMPLE, THEY CAN'T
CONTROL THEIR HEAD
OR DIRECT THEIR
EYES FOR VERY LONG.
A GREAT DEAL OF
RESEARCH IS FOCUSED ON
THE PRE-OPERATIONAL
STAGE.
PIAGET THOUGHT THAT
CHILDREN AT THIS AGE
WERE EGOCENTRIC
AND NOT ABLE TO
TAKE ANOTHER'S
VIEWPOINT INTO ACCOUNT.
THEIR INABILITY AT THE
THREE MOUNTAINS TASKS
DEMONSTRATES THIS.
HOWEVER, MARTIN HUGHES
DEVISED A STUDY IN WHICH
A CHILD HAS TO HIDE A DOLL
AROUND A CROSS-SHAPED
ARRANGEMENT OF WALLS FROM
A POLICEMAN-SHAPED DOLL.
TO DO THIS SUCCESSFULLY,
THE CHILD HAS TO TAKE
THE POLICEMAN'S POINT
OF VIEW INTO ACCOUNT.
THE TEST WAS REPEATED
WITH TWO POLICEMEN,
REQUIRING THE CHILD TO
COORDINATE TWO VIEWPOINTS.
THE CHILDREN WERE
TRAINED BEFOREHAND
AND IF THEY MADE A MISTAKE
IT WAS CAREFULLY EXPLAINED
TO ENSURE THAT
THEY UNDERSTOOD.
THE RESULTS
WERE DRAMATIC.
NINETY PERCENT OF CHILDREN
BETWEEN THREE AND A HALF
AND FIVE GAVE THE
CORRECT ANSWER,
WHEREAS PIAGET
CLAIMED THAT CHILDREN
UNDER EIGHT
COULDN'T DE-CENTER.
PERNER ARGUES THAT CHILDREN
ARE NOT EGOCENTRIC
BUT INTELLECTUAL
REALISTS.
HE BASED THIS
ASSUMPTION ON RESEARCH
WHICH SHOWS THAT
CHILDREN SEEM TO
INTERPRET THE THREE
MOUNTAINS TASK
AS REQUIRING THEM TO
PICK OUT THE PICTURE
WHICH BEST SHOWS
REALITY AS THEY KNOW IT.
THIS TENDENCY TO REPRESENT
WHAT THEY KNOW HAS REALLY
BEEN HIGHLIGHTED IN
CHILDRENS' DRAWINGS.
FOR EXAMPLE, IF
CHILDREN KNOW THAT
A CAR HAS FOUR WHEELS
THEY DRAW FOUR WHEELS
EVEN IF THEY
CAN ONLY SEE TWO.
STOP THE VIDEO
NOW AND CONSIDER
WHAT OTHER EXPLANATIONS
THERE MIGHT BE
WHY THE THREE
MOUNTAINS TASK AND
THE POLICEMAN/CHILD
EXPERIMENTS
FOUND SUCH STRIKINGLY
DIFFERENT RESULTS.
THESE COULD BE
METHODOLOGICAL DIFFERENCES
AS WELL AS BASED ON
THE TASK REQUIRED.
WELL, THERE ARE MANY
POSSIBLE REASONS AND IT'S
PROBABLY A COMBINATION
OF SEVERAL.
FIRST OF ALL, HUGHES MADE
SURE THAT THE CHILDREN
HAD A RUN THROUGH
WHAT THEY HAD TO DO,
AS WELL AS MAKING SURE
THAT THEY UNDERSTOOD
THE LANGUAGE INVOLVED.
THE SCENARIO OF HIDING FROM
PEOPLE WAS A FAMILIAR ONE.
AS MARGARET
DONALDSON SAYS
"IT MAKES HUMAN
SENSE TO THE CHILD".
THE FAMILIARITY OF THE
POLICEMAN AND THE WALLS
MAKE IT EVEN
MORE RELEVANT.
MANY CHILDREN HAVE NEVER
EVEN EXPERIENCED MOUNTAINS.
THERE WERE ALSO NO RIGHT
OR LEFT REVERSALS REQUIRED
IN THE POLICEMAN TASK AND
THERE WERE DIRECT HANDS-ON
EXPERIENCE RATHER THAN JUST
PHOTOGRAPHS TO LOOK AT.
THIS PRACTICAL CAN
BE EASILY CARRIED OUT
USING LEGO OR MAKING
CARDBOARD WALLS.
WE ADAPTED THE
MATERIALS TO CARRY OUT
A DEMONSTRATION
OURSELVES SIMILAR TO
THE THREE MOUNTAINS TASK
IN THAT IT REQUIRED
LEFT-RIGHT REVERSALS
AND USED PHOTOGRAPHS,
BUT WITH THE DIFFERENCE
OF USING TRAINING
AND FAMILIAR OBJECTS.
A SET OF PHOTOS
WERE PRODUCED
SHOWING EACH OF
FOUR VIEWPOINTS.
AFTER TRAINING, THE CHILD
WAS ASKED TO SELECT
THEIR OWN VIEWPOINT
AND THEN THAT OF
PINK PANTHER FROM
WHERE HE WAS SITTING.
...CAN SEE THAT ONE.
VERY GOOD.
THANK YOU VERY
MUCH INDEED,
THAT'S VERY HELPFUL.
AS WOULD BE EXPECTED,
WE DIDN'T GET
QUITE SUCH IMPRESSIVE
RESULTS AS HUGHES
BUT WE CERTAINLY
FOUND FIVE-YEAR-OLDS
WHO COULD PICK PINK
PANTHER'S CORRECT VIEW.
PIAGET'S METHODS OF
RESEARCH INTO CONSERVATION
MAY ALSO HAVE
UNDERESTIMATED
CHILDRENS' ABILITIES.
IN HIS ORIGINAL
CONSERVATION OF NUMBERS,
FOR EXAMPLE, TWO ROWS OF
EQUALLY SPACED COUNTERS,
WHICH THE CHILD
AGREES ARE IDENTICAL,
ARE THEN TRANSFORMED
BY THE ADULT.
TYPICALLY, PRE-OPERATIONAL
CHILDREN SAY THAT
THERE ARE LESS WHEN THE
SHAPE OF THE ROW CHANGES.
HOWEVER, IN MCGARRIGLE
AND DONALDSON'S STUDY
THEY USED AN ACCIDENTAL
TRANSFORMATION CONDITION
IN WHICH A NAUGHTY TEDDY
IS PRODUCED BY THE
EXPERIMENTER WHICH THEN
MESSES UP ONE ROW.
COMPARED WITH THE ADULT
DELIBERATELY CHANGING
THE ROWS, MANY MORE
FOUR TO FIVE YEAR OLDS
APPEARED ABLE
TO CONSERVE
IF IT APPEARED
TO BE AN ACCIDENT.
NEILSON REPLICATED THE
RESULTS OF MCGARRIGLE
AND DONALDSON, BUT WHEN
THEY ASKED THE CHILDREN
TO EXPLAIN WHY THE TWO ROWS
STILL HAD THE SAME NUMBER,
THERE WAS NO DIFFERENCE
IN THE NUMBERS WHO GAVE
A LOGICAL REASON
BETWEEN THE INTENTIONAL
ADULT CONDITION AND THE
NAUGHTY TEDDY CONDITION.
IT SEEMS POSSIBLE, THEN,
THAT CHILDREN SIMPLY
DISREGARD THE TRANSFORMATION
MADE BY NAUGHTY TEDDY
AS IRRELEVANT OR
AS PART OF A GAME
WHILE TAKING THAT PERFORMED
BY THE EXPERIMENTER
VERY SERIOUSLY.
THUS, THEY'RE
LIKELY TO GIVE
A SUPERFICIALLY
CORRECT ANSWER
WHICH OVERESTIMATES
THEIR ABILITY TO CONSERVE.
WE CAN SEE FROM THESE
STUDIES JUST HOW DIFFICULT
IT CAN BE TO GET RELIABLE
ANSWERS OUT OF CHILDREN
WHEN TESTING THEM WITH
THEIR VERY LIMITED ABILITY
TO EXPRESS
THEIR THOUGHTS.
THE TYPE OF LANGUAGE USED
IN EXPERIMENTS IS CENTRAL
TO THE INTERPRETATION
OF THE RESULTS.
CHILDRENS' UNDERSTANDING
OF ADULT LANGUAGE
IS LIMITED, AND QUESTIONS
NEED TO BE DEVISED
THAT MATCH THE LEVEL
OF LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT
OF THE CHILD.
THERE ARE ALSO MANY
OTHER WAYS IN WHICH
THE QUESTION OR TASK
CAN BE MISUNDERSTOOD
DUE TO SOCIAL
EXPECTATIONS.
THE CHILD HAS A
CERTAIN SET OF BELIEFS
ABOUT ADULTS WHICH MAY
AFFECT THEIR RESPONSE,
SUCH AS "ADULTS ALWAYS
TELL THE TRUTH" OR
"NO ONE ASKS A QUESTION
TWICE WITHOUT A GOOD REASON".
TAKE A TYPICAL CONSERVATION
OF LENGTH STUDY.
THE ADULT ASKS, "ARE THEY
BOTH THE SAME LENGTH?
THEN TRANSFORMS THE STICKS,
STRAWS, PENCILS, OR WHATEVER,
AND THEN ASKS THE VERY
SAME QUESTION AGAIN.
OBVIOUSLY THE CHILD
MAY THINK THAT
THE ADULT EXPECTS
A DIFFERENT ANSWER
OR THEY WOULDN'T
REPEAT THE QUESTION.
THESE SORT OF QUESTIONS
ALSO ASSUME THAT THE CHILD
KNOWS THE MEANING OF THE
WORDS "LENGTH" OR "LONGER".
PAUL LIGHT HAS SUGGESTED
THAT ALL TESTING CONDITIONS
INTRODUCE VERY SUBTLE
BIASES AND, IN THE CASE
OF CONSERVATION
EXPERIMENTS, IT MAY BE
THE NEED TO GIVE WHAT
THEY SEE AS A SOCIALLY
ACCEPTABLE ANSWER WHICH
WILL PLEASE THE ADULT.
THE PHRASING OF
THE QUESTION,
NON-VERBAL COMMUNICATION,
AND EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
CAN ALL AFFECT THE
CHILD'S RESPONSE.
YES, THEY ARE!
NO, BECAUSE THAT
ONE'S LIKE THAT...
IF YOU MOVE THEM
BACK LIKE THAT
THEY'RE BOTH
THE SAME SIZE.
IT'S JUST THAT
YOU'RE MOVING THEM.
THESE BIASES HAVE
IMPLICATIONS FOR EDUCATION
AND THE METHODS TEACHERS
USE TO QUESTION PUPILS
IN THE CLASSROOM.
LIGHT DESIGNED A CONDITION
OF THE CONSERVATION OF
LIQUID EXPERIMENT WHEREBY
INSTEAD OF LIQUID BEING
DELIBERATELY TRANSFERRED
TO A DIFFERENTLY SHAPED
GLASS FOR APPARENTLY
NO GOOD REASON,
HE "DISCOVERED" THAT
ONE GLASS WAS CHIPPED
AND HE CASUALLY
REPLACED IT.
THE CUES PICKED UP BY
THE CHILD FROM THE ADULT
IN THIS INCIDENTAL
CONDITION MAY BE THAT
THIS TRANSFORMATION
MAKES NO DIFFERENCE;
JUST IGNORE IT.
AND THIS IS EXACTLY
WHAT CHILDREN DO
WHEN THEY CONSERVE.
THERE ARE MANY SOUND,
LOGICAL REASONS THAT WE
MIGHT GIVE IN THE
CONSERVATION OF LIQUID
- FOR EXAMPLE, WHY THE
LIQUID IS THE SAME.
WE MIGHT NOTE THAT THE
HEIGHT IN THE GLASS
IS COMPENSATED FOR BY THE
WIDTH OF THE FAT GLASS,
OR THAT IF THE
TRANSFORMATION WAS REVERSED
THAT THE QUANTITIES WOULD
SEEM TO BE THE SAME, AND
OF COURSE THAT NOTHING'S
BEEN ADDED OR TAKEN AWAY.
HOWEVER, IT'S PROBABLY
UNREALISTIC TO EXPECT
A JUST CONSERVING CHILD
TO BE ABLE TO TELL YOU
ONE OF THESE REASONS
EVEN IF THEY KNEW THEM
AND THIS MAKES IT
DIFFICULT TO KNOW IF
THE CHILD IS A CONSERVER
OR IS JUST GUESSING RIGHT.
FLAVELL POINTED OUT THAT
BOTH FALSE POSITIVES
AND FALSE NEGATIVES
ARE POSSIBLE
IN THIS KIND OF TASK.
THAT'S TO SAY THAT A CHILD
CAN GIVE A CORRECT ANSWER
WITHOUT HAVING THE COGNITIVE
SKILL WE'RE INVESTIGATING,
OR IT CAN FAIL TO
GIVE A CORRECT ANSWER
WHEN IT ACTUALLY
POSSESSES THE SKILL.
COWAN MADE THE VALID
OBSERVATION THAT
MOST CONSERVATIONS ARE
APPROXIMATIONS ANYWAY.
IF YOU KNOW SOMETHING
ABOUT PHYSICS, YOU MAY
TAKE INTO ACCOUNT THE
DIFFERENTIAL EVAPORATION
FROM THE SURFACE OF THE
LIQUID IN THE TWO GLASSES
OR THE RESIDUE OF DROPS
LEFT IN THE FIRST GLASS
AFTER TRANSFER.
IF A CHILD SEES A DROP OF
WATER LEFT IN THE GLASS,
DOES HE OR SHE
SEE IT AS EMPTY?
MOVING ON TO RESEARCH
FINDINGS RELATED TO
THE FINAL STAGE, THE
FORMAL OPERATIONAL,
PIAGET THOUGHT
THAT MOST PEOPLE
REACH FORMAL OPERATIONS
AND APPLY IT GENERALLY
TO EVERYTHING.
BUT IT SEEMS THAT HE
WAS WRONG ABOUT THIS.
YOU MAY LIKE TO TEST
YOURSELF BY PAUSING
THE VIDEO FOR A MINUTE AND
ANSWERING THIS QUESTION.
WHAT WOULD HAPPEN IF NO
MORE BABIES WERE BORN?
THE CONCRETE OPERATION
THINKER WOULD RESPOND BY
LOOKING PUZZLED, SAYING
IT WAS SILLY, OR REFER TO
SOMETHING CONCRETE
THAT WOULD ACTUALLY
AFFECT WHAT THEY
WOULD SEE SUCH AS
THERE WOULDN'T BE ANY MORE
BABIES IN THE STREET.
A FORMAL OPERATIONS
THINKER WOULD BE ABLE
TO DEAL WITH SUCH A
HYPOTHETICAL SITUATION
WITH IDEAS SUCH AS THE
EFFECT ON THE FUTURE
OF MANKIND, THE IMPORTANCE
OF EXISTING SPERM BANKS,
OR THE CRIPPLING
EFFECT ON
THE BABY CARE
PRODUCTS INDUSTRY.
BUT DON'T PANIC IF
YOU DIDN'T THINK
FORMAL OPERATIONALLY
ON THIS OCCASION,
THOUGH YOU UNDOUBTEDLY
NEED TO IN STUDYING
SOMETHING AS ABSTRACT
AS PSYCHOLOGY.
RESEARCH CARRIED OUT BY
NEIMARK FOUND THAT ONLY
30% OF ADULTS USE FORMAL
OPERATION THOUGHT AT ALL.
THE USUAL WAY TO
TEST THIS IS TO GIVE
A BATTERY OF FORMAL
OPERATIONAL TASKS
INVOLVING ABSTRACT THOUGHT,
PROBLEM SOLVING, ETC.,
TO SUBJECTS OF
11 YEARS UPWARDS.
AN EXPERIMENT BY
MARTORANO, FOR EXAMPLE,
GAVE TEN DIFFERENT TASKS
TO 80 DIFFERENT SUBJECTS
IN GROUPS AGED 11,
13, 15, AND 17 YEARS.
IT WAS FOUND THAT THE OLDER
STUDENTS DID MUCH BETTER,
THAT THERE WAS A MAJOR
SPURT IN FORMAL OPERATION
THINKING BETWEEN 13 AND
15, AND THAT ALL TASKS
WERE NOT FOUND TO BE
EQUALLY DIFFICULT.
IN FACT, IT WAS FOUND THAT
ONLY TWO 17-YEAR-OLDS
SHOWED FORMAL OPERATIONAL
THOUGHT ON ALL TASKS.
CONCRETE THOUGHT IS, AFTER
ALL, QUITE SUFFICIENT
FOR EVERYDAY USE, AND IF
YOUR LIFE DOESN'T DEMAND IT,
YOU MAY HAVE VERY
LITTLE PRACTICE
AT USING FORMAL
OPERATION THOUGHT.
SO THESE FINDINGS, AND
MANY OTHERS BESIDES,
SUGGEST THAT PIAGET'S
STAGES EXIST BUT THAT
THE AGES HE SUGGESTED WERE
NOT ENTIRELY ACCURATE.
THIS MAY BE DUE TO THE
FACT THAT HE TESTED
SMALL SAMPLES, USED HIS
OWN CHILDREN WHO HAD
PROFESSIONAL PARENTS, AND
THAT MANY OF HIS TASKS
AND THE LANGUAGE
HE USED IN THEM
WERE NOT RELEVANT
TO TODAY'S CHILDREN.
THERE'S BEEN MUCH DEBATE
ABOUT THE ROLE OF LANGUAGE
IN DEVELOPING THOUGHT.
JEROME BRUNER AGREES WITH
PIAGET ABOUT THE IMPORTANCE
OF INNATE STRUCTURES IN
HELPING US TO ORGANIZE
OUR WORLD AND TO DEVELOP
THOUGHT AND THE IMPORTANCE
OF THE CHILD'S
ACTIVE INTERACTION
WITH THE ENVIRONMENT;
HOWEVER, FOR BRUNER,
LANGUAGE AND LOGICAL
THINKING ARE INSEPARABLE.
LANGUAGE DOESN'T
REFLECT WHAT THE CHILD
IS THINKING, BUT
ACTUALLY SHAPES THOUGHT.
LANGUAGE PROVIDES THE
MEANS OF TRANSFORMING
EXPERIENCE AND CAN
DIRECTLY HELP THE CHILD
TO THINK - FOR EXAMPLE,
BY FOCUSING ATTENTION
ON FEATURES IN
THE ENVIRONMENT,
BY ENCOURAGING
CATEGORIZATION,
PROBLEM SOLVING,
ACQUISITION OF KNOWLEDGE,
AND ALLOWING
HYPOTHETICAL THOUGHT.
HOWEVER, FOR PIAGET,
LANGUAGE IS MERELY A TOOL
TO BE USED IN
OPERATIONAL THINKING.
CHILDREN
EXPERIENCE FIRST,
AND THEN USE LANGUAGE
TO REPRESENT THEIR THOUGHT.
RESEARCH TO CHOOSE BETWEEN
THE TWO POINTS OF VIEW
HAS BEEN BASED ON
SUGGESTIONS THAT TRAINING
SPEEDS UP CHILDRENS'
COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT.
BUT THE RESULTS
ARE MIXED.
IN GENERAL, THE DEBATE
TENDS TO FAVOR PIAGET'S
POSITION AND WE MAY ACCEPT
THAT WHILE LANGUAGE MAY BE
NECESSARY FOR OPERATIONAL
THINKING OR SYMBOLIC
THOUGHT TO DEVELOP, IT IS
NOT A SUFFICIENT CAUSE.
OVERALL, PIAGET'S THEORY
HAS BEEN OF MAJOR IMPORTANCE
IN BEING THE FIRST TO
SHOW US THAT CHILDREN
ARE NOT JUST MINI ADULTS,
THAT CHILDREN ARE NOT
JUST LESS KNOWLEDGEABLE,
BUT THEIR THINKING
IS QUALITIVELY
DIFFERENT FROM ADULTS.
THAT A CHILD MUST GO
THROUGH THE ACTIONS
HIMSELF RATHER THAN
LEARN FROM ADULTS.
THAT CHILDREN GO THROUGH
THE SAME STAGES
OF COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT
IN THE SAME ORDER
BUT AT DIFFERENT RATES.
THAT CHILDREN ARE
VERY LIMITED TO
THEIR OWN PERSPECTIVE
OF THE WORLD.
AND THERE'S NO POINT
IN ARGUING LOGICALLY
WITH YOUNG CHILDREN
BECAUSE THEY DON'T
HAVE ADULT LOGIC.
ONLY MATURITY AND
EXPERIENCE CAN HELP
A CHILD TO
DEVELOP THOUGHT,
AND THE EXPERIENCE SHOULD
BE IN THE FORM OF DOING.
THESE IDEAS HAVE HELPED TO
SHAPE THE WAY WE BRING OUR
CHILDREN UP AND THE WAY WE
EDUCATE THEM IN SCHOOLS.
WE NOW KNOW THAT PARENTS
AND TEACHERS NEED TO
PROVIDE CHILDREN WITH THE
FREEDOM AND OPPORTUNITY
TO HAVE A WIDE RANGE
OF ACTIVE EXPERIENCES
WHICH THEY CAN ASSIMILATE
AND ACCOMMODATE TO.
STRICTLY SPEAKING, A
CHILD CAN'T BE TAUGHT,
BUT HIS COGNITIVE GROWTH
CAN BE FACILITATED.
SCHOOLING PROVIDES THE
CHILD WITH OPPORTUNITIES
TO USE THEIR
NATURAL CURIOSITY
TO ACTIVELY EXPLORE
THE ENVIRONMENT.
PLAY IS VERY IMPORTANT
AS AN ACTIVE PROCESS
IN WHICH CHILDREN DIRECTLY
ACT ON THEIR WORLD
AND MAKE SENSE OF IT.
PLAY IS A MAJOR WAY
IN WHICH THE CHILD
LEARNS IN PRE-SCHOOL
AND OFFERS A MODEL FOR
LEARNING BEYOND THAT.
THERE'S NO DOUBT THAT
NURSERY AND PRIMARY SCHOOL
PRACTICE NOW HAS A MUCH
GREATER EMPHASIS ON
DISCOVERY LEARNING AND
ACTIVITY BASED WORK
WHICH TAKES INTO ACCOUNT
THE LIKELY READINESS
OF THE CHILD IN
COGNITIVE TERMS.
IT IS NOW CLEAR THAT
CONCRETE OBJECTS
MUST BE USED TO
INTRODUCE NEW CONCEPTS
AND THAT WHAT CHILDREN
LEARN MUST BE LINKED
TO IDEAS THAT THEY HAVE
ALREADY EXPERIENCED.
THE TEACHER'S TASK, THEN,
IS TO PROMOTE COGNITIVE
GROWTH BY PROVIDING
A CHALLENGING AND
STIMULATING PROGRAM OF
ACTIVITIES WHICH ARE
APPROPRIATE TO A CHILD'S
DEVELOPMENTAL STAGE.
WITH OLDER CHILDREN,
SCIENCE AND MATH
TEACHING PROGRAMS
ARE NOW DESIGNED
TO TAKE INTO ACCOUNT
THE JUMPS INTO
OPERATIONAL THOUGHT
AND INTO FORMAL THOUGHT
AND OFFER APPROPRIATE
HANDS-ON EXPERIENCE.
HOWEVER MUCH VALIDITY
PIAGET'S IDEAS
WOULD SEEM TO HAVE, IT
IS IMPORTANT TO KNOW
IF THEY WORK
IN PRACTICE.
THE NUFFIELD SCIENCE
PROGRAMS NOW BEING USED
RELATE WELL TO
PIAGET'S IDEAS,
AND TO THE EXTENT THAT
THEY'RE EFFECTIVE,
THEY CAN BE SEEN TO
VALIDATE HIS THEORY.
IN PRESCHOOL EDUCATION,
PIAGET'S IDEAS
HAVE NOW BECOME
CONVENTIONAL WISDOM.
EVIDENCE FOR
EFFECTIVENESS, THOUGH,
IS DOGGED BY
DISAGREEMENTS ABOUT
WHAT EFFECTIVENESS IS, LET
ALONE HOW TO MEASURE IT.
IS EDUCATION TO
ACQUIRE SKILLS?
IS IT TO LEARN
KNOWLEDGE?
IS IT TO DEVELOP
AS A HUMAN BEING
AND TAKE YOUR
PLACE IN SOCIETY?
THE LACK OF AGREEMENT
ON WHERE THE EMPHASIS
SHOULD FALL IS REFLECTED
IN DEBATES ON THE VALUE OF
EDUCATIONAL TESTING, AND
IT MAKES IT VERY DIFFICULT
TO SAY THAT PIAGET
IS RIGHT OR WRONG.
IN GENERAL, THOUGH,
PIAGET'S WORK CAN BE
CONSIDERED TO HAVE HAD
A LIBERATING AND HIGHLY
BENEFICIAL EFFECT ON
CONVENTIONAL EDUCATION.
JEROME BRUNER WHOM
WE MENTIONED EARLIER
WAS GREATLY INFLUENCED
BY PIAGET'S WORK AND
DEVELOPED HIS OWN THEORY
OF COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT
WHICH HAS MANY
SIMILARITIES.
HE AGREES THAT WE'RE BORN
WITH AN ABILITY TO ORGANIZE
OUR WORLD AND THAT
MATURATION AND ENVIRONMENT
INTERACT TO PRODUCE
COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT.
BUT BRUNER SEES
DEVELOPMENT NOT IN TERMS
OF STAGES BUT IN
DIFFERENT MODES
OF REPRESENTING
THE WORLD.
HE SPECIFIED THREE WAYS
IN WHICH WE CAN GAIN
KNOWLEDGE AND
UNDERSTANDING.
THE FIRST OF THESE
IS THE ENACTIVE MODE.
THE CHILD REPRESENTS
OBJECTS AND ACTIONS
THROUGH THE MOTOR BEHAVIORS
THAT GO WITH THEM.
JUST AS ADULTS MAY
STILL BEST REPRESENT
SOME ROUTINE BEHAVIORS
IN TERMS OF ACTIONS
SUCH AS PUTTING ON
MAKEUP OR SHAVING.
THE SECOND MODE OF
REPRESENTATION TO EMERGE
IS THE ICONIC, FROM THE
GREEK WORD "IMAGE".
THE CHILD OF ROUGHLY THE
SAME AGE AS THOSE IN
PIAGET'S PRE-OPERATION
STAGE DEALS WITH THE WORLD
IN TERMS OF IMAGES, THAT
IS, WHAT IT LOOKS LIKE.
THIS CAN BE SEEN IN
THE CHILD'S FAILURE
AT CONSERVATION TASKS.
BOTH BRUNER AND PIAGET
AGREE THAT A CHANGE
OF MAJOR IMPORTANCE
OCCURS AT THE AGE OF
AROUND SIX
TO SEVEN YEARS.
FOR PIAGET IT'S A SHIFT
INTO OPERATIONAL THINKING,
BUT FOR BRUNER IT'S
THE ABILITY TO USE
THE SYMBOLIC MODE
OF REPRESENTATION,
HIS THIRD MODE.
MOVEMENT INTO THIS
SYMBOLIC MODE OCCURS,
BRUNER BELIEVES, AS
A RESULT OF LANGUAGE.
THE POWER OF SYMBOLIC
REASONING IS NEATLY
DEMONSTRATED BY BRUNER AND
KENNY'S WELL KNOWN STUDY
REQUIRING CHILDREN TO
RE-ORDER A DISTURBED ARRAY
OF GLASSES OF DIFFERENT
HEIGHTS AND WIDTHS.
YOU CAN RE-CREATE THIS
EXPERIMENT EASILY USING
ANY ORDERED GROUPS OF
OBJECTS OR MATERIALS.
WE USED SOME TYPE
OF PLASTICINE.
THE CHILDREN ARE SHOWN THE
LOGIC OF THE ARRANGEMENT
AND THEN ASKED INITIALLY
TO REARRANGE THE ORDER
OF THE PIECES.
THEY ARE THEN ASKED
TO RE-CREATE THE ARRAY
IN MIRROR IMAGE ORDER.
TYPICALLY, SIX-YEAR-OLDS
CAN RE-CREATE THE DISPLAY,
BUT HAVE GREAT DIFFICULTY
WITH THE MIRROR IMAGE BIT.
...AND YOU FILL
IN THE REST.
HOWEVER, ACCORDING TO
BRUNER, SEVEN-YEAR-OLDS
AND ABOVE WHO ARE NOW ABLE
TO THINK SYMBOLICALLY
AND ARE NO LONGER TIED TO
THE IMAGE, COULD DO THIS.
THEY RELIED UPON VERBAL
CUES TO GUIDE THEM
SUCH AS "GETS FATTER
GOING ONE WAY",
"GETS TALLER GOING
THE OTHER WAY".
THE CHILD USING IMAGES
CAN ONLY REPRODUCE.
THE CHILD USING SYMBOLS
CAN RECONSTRUCT.
THE MAJOR DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN PIAGET'S AND
BRUNER'S THEORIES IS
THE ROLE OF LANGUAGE.
PIAGET BELIEVES THE MOVE
TO LOGICAL THOUGHT IS
THROUGH THE ACQUISITION
OF OPERATIONS.
BRUNER SAYS THE LEAP
FROM ICONIC TO SYMBOLIC
IS DUE TO THE
DEVELOPMENT OF LANGUAGE.
WITHOUT LANGUAGE, BRUNER
SAYS, HUMAN THOUGHT
WOULD BE LIMITED TO
WHAT COULD BE LEARNED
THROUGH ACTIONS
AND IMAGES.
THAT IS, THERE WOULD
BE NO SYMBOLIC THOUGHT
OR ABSTRACT THOUGHT.
NOW WHAT OF FUTURE RESEARCH
IN COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT?
GRAND THEORIES ARE NOW OUT
OF FASHION, BUT DETAILED
AND PAINSTAKING RESEARCH
CONTINUES APACE.
MAJOR AREAS OF RECENT
RESEARCH INTEREST
ARE META-COGNITION AND
THE THEORY OF MIND.
I'LL TELL YOU A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT EACH.
META-COGNITION MEANS
DEVELOPING A GREATER
AWARENESS OF OUR
COGNITIVE ACTIVITY.
IT'S BEING AWARE
OF OUR OWN MEMORY,
OUR OWN COMPREHENSION,
OUR OWN LANGUAGE,
AND OUR OWN IDEAS.
IN OTHER WORDS, IT'S
KNOWING WHAT WE KNOW.
AS ONE RESEARCHER,
ROBINSON, POINTS OUT,
BEING AWARE OF HAVING
HEARD SOMETHING
BUT NOT HAVING TAKEN IT IN
- POSSIBLY THIS VIDEO -
BECAUSE YOU'RE
DISTRACTED
OR THINKING ABOUT
SOMETHING ELSE,
IS AN EXAMPLE
OF A META-COGNITIVE EXPERIENCE.
YOU'RE AWARE OF YOUR OWN
COGNITIVE PROCESSES,
AT LEAST TO
SOME DEGREE.
CHILDREN BECOME
INCREASINGLY ABLE
TO DO THIS AND ARE
THEREFORE ABLE TO CONTROL
THEIR OWN LEARNING
THROUGH USE OF
GOOD LEARNING AND
MEMORY STRATEGIES.
ANOTHER RESEARCHER,
MARKMAN, SHOWED THAT
CHILDREN OF FIVE WERE
LESS AWARE OF THEIR OWN
COGNITIVE PROCESSES
THAN SEVEN-YEAR-OLDS.
YOU CAN SHOW
THIS YOURSELF
BY FOLLOWING
HIS PROCEDURE.
YOU'LL NEED SOME
FIVE-YEAR-OLD
AND SEVEN-YEAR-OLD
SUBJECTS.
THE CHILDREN ARE GIVEN
INCOMPLETE INSTRUCTIONS
ABOUT HOW TO DO A MAGIC
TRICK OR HOW TO PLAY A GAME
AND NOTE
THEIR REACTION.
THE FIVE-YEAR-OLDS
WILL TEND TO CARRY ON,
DOING THE TASK, AND
THEY AREN'T SUCCESSFUL,
WHEREBY THE SEVEN-YEAR-OLDS
WILL REALIZE EARLY
THAT THEY WON'T
BE ABLE TO DO IT
BECAUSE THEY HAD
INCOMPLETE INSTRUCTION.
THEY'LL ASK QUESTIONS ABOUT
THE TASK AND MAY POINT OUT
THAT THE INSTRUCTIONS
WERE INADEQUATE.
THEY'RE OBVIOUSLY MORE
ABLE TO RUN THROUGH
THE TASK MENTALLY
BEFORE ATTEMPTING IT
AND TO DISCOVER WHAT
THEY DIDN'T KNOW.
THIS CONTROL OVER YOUR
OWN MENTAL PROCESSES
IS OBVIOUSLY VERY IMPORTANT
FOR SUCCESSFUL LEARNING.
POOR STUDENTS COULD BE
SAID TO BE THOSE WHO ARE
UNAWARE OF WHAT THEY KNOW
AND WHAT THEY DON'T KNOW.
THAT IS, THOSE WITH
POOR META-COGNITION.
IN THEORY OF MIND STUDIES,
RESEARCHERS ARE INTERESTED
IN FINDING OUT AT WHAT
POINT CHILDREN START TO
BECOME AWARE
OF THEIR OWN
AND OF OTHERS'
COGNITIVE PROCESSES.
WHEN DO THEY DEVELOP AN
UNDERSTANDING THAT OTHERS
HAVE INDEPENDENT
MINDS OF THEIR OWN,
AND WHEN DO THEY DEVELOP
THEIR OWN THEORY
OF HOW THE MIND WORKS?
IT'S EARLY DAYS YET
TO HAVE MANY FINDINGS,
BUT THERE ARE
SOME RECENT ONES;
FOR EXAMPLE, SOME
RESEARCH BY LESLIE.
A CHILD IS TOLD THAT SALLY
HIDES A SWEET IN A BOX
AND THEN GOES OUT, AND
THAT ANN THEN COMES IN
AND FINDS THE SWEET AND
MOVES IT TO A BASKET.
THE CHILD IS THEN ASKED
TO SAY WHERE SALLY WILL
LOOK FOR THE SWEET
WHEN SHE COMES BACK.
WILL THE CHILD
SAY WHAT SHE KNOWS
OR WILL SHE UNDERSTAND
THAT SALLY WILL
STILL THINK HER SWEET
WILL BE IN THE BOX?
THREE-YEAR-OLDS GENERALLY
GET THIS WRONG,
BUT FOUR-YEAR-OLDS
GET IT RIGHT.
IN OUR ADAPTATION OF
LESLIE'S EXPERIMENT,
THE CHILD SEES PINK PANTHER
HIDE TWO SWEETS UNDER
A POLICEMAN'S HELMET AND
THEN GO OUT SHOPPING.
WHILE HE'S OUT OF
SIGHT, NAUGHTY TEDDY
MOVES THE SWEETS
TO ANOTHER HELMET
AND THEN PINK PANTHER
RETURNS FROM THE SHOPS.
WHERE IS PINK PANTHER GOING
TO LOOK FOR HIS SWEETS?
UNDER THERE!
BUT THEY'RE NOT
THERE, ARE THEY?
AND THEN HE'LL
LOOK UNDER THERE!
AND WHERE WILL
HE FIND THEM?
UNDER THERE.
WELL DONE!
THIS IS ILLUSTRATED BY
ANOTHER RECENT STUDY,
THIS TIME BY
PERNER ET AL.
THEY SHOWED THE
FIVE-YEAR-OLDS
A SMARTIES TUBE AND ASKED
THEM WHAT WAS IN IT.
NATURALLY ENOUGH, THEY ALL
THOUGHT IT WAS SMARTIES.
IT WAS THEN REVEALED
THAT IT ONLY CONTAINED
A PENCIL.
SOME CHILDREN RECOGNIZED
THEIR FALSE BELIEF,
WHILE OTHERS SAID
THEY THOUGHT
IT CONTAINED A
PENCIL ALL ALONG.
THE INTERESTING POINT
HERE IS THAT WHEN ASKED
WHAT ANOTHER CHILD WOULD
THINK WAS IN THE TUBE,
THEY ALL ANSWERED
"PENCIL".
SO, ALTHOUGH ABLE TO ADMIT
THEIR OWN FALSE BELIEF,
THE CHILDREN ARE NOT ABLE
TO UNDERSTAND WHERE THEIR
FALSE BELIEF CAME FROM
AND SO CANNOT CORRECTLY
PREDICT HOW ANOTHER
CHILD WOULD ANSWER.
IN FACT, THE MAJORITY
OF CHILDREN UNDER FOUR
CANNOT ADMIT THEIR
OWN FALSE BELIEF.
RESEARCH IN THIS
AREA IS CONTINUING
AND INTERESTING
SPIN-OFFS SHEDDING LIGHT
ON COGNITION AND
AUTISM, FOR EXAMPLE.
RECENT RESEARCH WITH
AUTISTIC CHILDREN SUGGESTS
THAT THEY HAVE FAILED TO
DEVELOP A THEORY OF MIND.
HARRIS HAS SHOWN THAT
AUTISTIC CHILDREN ARE
UNABLE TO UNDERSTAND WHAT
OTHER PEOPLE ARE LIKELY
TO BELIEVE AND WHAT OTHER
PEOPLES' WISHES MAY BE,
THUS PREVENTING THEM FROM
RELATING NORMALLY TO OTHERS.
HE CALLED THIS A "SOCIAL
COGNITIVE DEFICIT".
THIS TYPE OF RESEARCH
HIGHLIGHTS THE CLOSE
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE
SOCIAL AND THE COGNITIVE
DEVELOPMENT OF THE CHILD.
AS WE SAID EARLIER,
PIAGET TENDS TO
PORTRAY THE COGNITIVE
DEVELOPMENT OF THE CHILD
AS SEPARATE FROM
HIS SOCIAL WORLD.
RESEARCH NOW IS TRYING
TO REDRESS THE BALANCE.
WE NOW KNOW VASTLY
MORE ABOUT COGNITIVE
DEVELOPMENT THAN WE DID
EVEN TEN YEARS AGO.
WE COULD THINK OF
THIS AS A PAINTING IN
OF PIAGET'S ALREADY
DRAWN SKETCH.
DETAIL IS ADDED
AND SOMETIMES THE
COMPOSITION IS CHANGED,
BUT THE BASIC PICTURE
IS RECOGNIZABLY THE SAME.
WE GAIN ENORMOUSLY IN
RICHNESS AND DETAIL,
BUT SOMETIMES THE OUTLINES
GET A LITTLE HAZY.